A Sādhana of Hayagrīva’s Assembly, from the Heart-Essence of the Vast Expanse
by Jigme Lingpa

Homage to the kāya of Natural Liberation of Suffering!
To practice that deity in a wrathful form, the sacred commitment of the Sovereign King,1 first
carry out the preliminaries according to the peaceful sādhana.
hrih, yingrik zungjuk dakpa chenpö ying
Hrīḥ. The union of space and awareness is the space of great purity.
rangnang lhündrub riwo po tala
My entire perception, spontaneously perfect, is the Potala Mountain,
datak tsennyi dzokpé kyilkhor ü
With symbols, signs, and characteristics perfect within the maṇḍala. In its centre
natsok pema tongden nyidé teng
Is a multi-coloured, thousand-petalled lotus and sun- and moon-disk seats.
hrih lé rangnyi pakchok tukjé lha
From hrīḥ, I arise as the Noble One, the deity of compassion,
yong gyur trogyal tamdrin düpa ni
Transforming into the Assembly of Hayagrīva, King of the Wrathful Ones.
lu dang gyal sen nolwé den gyi teng
Standing upon a seat of nāgas and male and female demons, intertwined,
kudok marpo dü té mé tar bar
He is red in colour and blazes like the inferno at the end of times.
shyal chik chak nyi chen sum chewa tsik
He has one face, two hands, three eyes and is baring his fangs.
chak yé yuktö nangsi zil gyi nön
In his right hand he holds a club which subjugates appearance and existence.
yönpé dik jub lunyen dé gyé zir
His left hand, in the threatening mudrā, points at the nāgas, nyens and the eight classes.
ralpa kham nak tökam nga yi gyen
His long hair is dark brown and he is crowned with five dry skulls.
ta go jang shyur tserwé ngok ma né
The green horse-head’s muzzle shines and from its manes
dorjé tsatsé drekpa gyal shying ngang
Shoot out vajra sparks, terrorizing the arrogant spirits and causing them to faint.
ku ché yenlak rakpé bapu kün
His body is huge with muscular limbs, and from the pores of his body
tro chung gotsam mepé sungwé tam
Small wrathful deities shoot out and fill the space, granting complete protection.
shying gi yangshyi tak gi shamtab dang
He wears the skin of a person fit to be liberated, a tiger-skin skirt,
tötreng tsar sum drul gyi tsang kü chang
Three skull-garlands, a Brahmin's thread of snakes,
rik shyi to drö chak shyab dubu jé
And bracelets and anklets made of snakes of the four castes.
rang dré rik ma dri tö dzinmé khyü
He is embraced by his consort, similar to himself, who holds a knife and skull-cup.
dortab mepung barwé long na gying
He is poised with dignity amidst an expanse of blazing fire and is ready to act.
tsib shyir wangchen dé shyi lé dok yum
On the four spokes are the Mighty Ones of the four classes, coloured according to their activity
and with consort.
yepa rang tak yönpa khyung tra gyé
Their right hands hold their respective implements and their left hands dispatch garuḍas of
various colours.
khyam la zilnön go shyir shar goné
Controlling the courtyards, at the four doors are, starting from the East,
ta dong chakkyu pak dong shyakpa ma
The Horse-Faced Lady wielding a hook, the Boar-Faced Lady holding a lasso,
seng dong chakdrok khyi dong drilbu dzin
The Lion-Faced Lady brandishing shackles and the Dog-Faced Lady clutching a bell.
yönpa rang tak kar ser mar jang dok
Their left hands hold the implement of their family, and they are coloured white, yellow, red
and green.
nangtong drib yok dralwé ying né sal
All arise as appearance and emptiness, vividly present in unobscured space.
kün kyang né sum yikdru sum gyi tsen
The deities' three centres are marked with the three seed syllables…
And so on, continue with the peaceful sādhana. For the praise, change the words ‘In your form
as Natural Liberation of Suffering’ to:
hayagriwe kur
In your form as Hayagrīva…
and when it says ‘Ladies of the four families’, change the words to
wangchen dé shyi
The four divisions of Mighty Ones…
The Recitation of the Approach Phase
yeshe sempa semnyi ngalsor salwé tukkar pé nyi tengdu hrih yik marpö tar
Within the heart of the wisdom deity, appearing in the form of Natural Liberation of Suffering,
upon a lotus and sun disk seat, is a red syllable hrīḥ, surrounded by
om benza krota hayaghriwa hulu hulu hung pé
oṃ vajra-krodha-hayagrīva hulu hulu hūṃ phaṭ
Focus on the turning of the [mantra garland]. The number of mantras that must be recited in
order to carry out activities is 100,000 for each of the mantra’s seed-syllables.
To carry out the activities, add the following before the root mantra:
é arali
e ārali
And at the end:
benza dün jo | trik nen dza dza | samaya satom
vajra dün bhyoḥ | trig nan jaḥ jaḥ | samaya satvaṃ
All appearance and existence is incinerated by sparks of fire and purified into emptiness. Through
maintaining the radiance of the nature of reality, all the eight classes of gods and
demons will be brought under control.
At the end of the session, carry out the concluding rituals such as the wheel of the feast-offering
by adapting the words of the Vidyādhara Assembly text.2
Based on this practice, which is easy, convenient and imbued with great blessing,
The Emperor sounded the horse’s neigh
Throughout the three thousand-fold universe.
Therefore, this important teaching on Hayagrīva
Is renowned as the tradition of the King.

Samaya. Seal, seal, seal. Let the signs be absorbed.

| Translated by Han Kop and reviewed by Josh Capitanio, 2021, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project.
With gratitude to Tulku Dawa Zangpo and Khenpo Sonam Tsewang for their clarifications
and Stefan Mang for his corrections.

Source: 'Jigs med gling pa. "klong chen snying gi thig le las/ rta mgrin 'dus pa'i sgrub thabs."
In klong chen snying thig rtsa pod. 5 Vols. BDRC W1KG13585. Bodhnath, Kathmandu and Bodhgaya,
Bihar: Shechen Publications, 1994. Vol. 2: 409–411.

Version: 1.1-20210907
↑ King Tri Songdetsen↑ https://www.lotsawahouse.org/tibetan-masters/jigme-lingpa/rigdzin-dupa