Daily Practice of Hayagrīva
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

After taking refuge and generating bodhicitta:
hrih lé pema nyima dang
Out of Hrīḥ, on a lotus and sun disc,
drul gyé nolwé den teng na
And a seat of eight folded serpents,
kechik dren dzok tamdrin ni
I appear as Hayagrīva, perfect in an instant of recollection.
marpo shyal sum chak drukpa
He is red with three faces and six arms,
ü mar yé jang yön karwa
The central face red, the right green and left white,
u tsuk ta go sum gyi tsen
All three featuring horse’s heads at the crown.
dorjé khatam raldri yé
He holds vajra, khaṭvāṅga and sword in his right hands,
dik dzub dungtung gyu shyak yön
Makes a threatening mudrā and holds a spear and lasso with his left hands.
shyab gyé dortab taksham dang
His eight legs are in the heroic stance and he wears a tiger-skin skirt.
migo kam lön drul gyi gyen
Dried and fresh skulls and a chain of serpents adorn him,
yeshe mepung shyukpar sal
And he stands amidst a blazing mass of wisdom fire.
tukkar nyi teng hrih mar sal
At his heart, upon a sun disc, is a clear red Hrīḥ
ngak kyi trengwé korwa lé
Surrounded by the mantra garland,
ö trö dön gek kün chom shying
From which light radiates out to destroy all harmful influences and obstacles
jinlab ngödrub tobpar gyur
And to bring the attainment of blessings and accomplishment.
om hrih pemanta krita benza kordha hyaghriwa huluhulu hung pé
oṃ hrīḥ padmānta kṛta vajra krodha hayagrīva hulu hulu hūṃ phaṭ
Recite this mantra. At the end of the session, continue with:
lhar nang chönyi ying su tim
Appearance as the deity dissolves into the space of dharmatā.
lar yang tamdrin ku ru dang
Then, once again, I arise in the form of Hayagrīva.
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Recite this to guard the three centres. Then conclude with:
gewa di yi nyurdu dak
Through the positivity and merit of this, may I swiftly
wangchen tamdrin drub gyur né
Attain the realization of Hayagrīva, and thereby
drowa chik kyang malüpa
Every single sentient being
dé yi sa la göpar shok
Reach his state of perfection too.
With this, dedicate the merit and make prayers of aspiration.

Chökyi Lodrö wrote this for Sonam Gyaltsen.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "rta mgrin rgyun 'khyer/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo
gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 6: 310–311