Prayer to the Lineage of the Supreme Hayagrīva Emanation from the Aural Transmission
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

deden dangpö sangye öpakmé
Amitābha, original Buddha within the Blissful realm,
longchö yongdzok wangchen tachok pal
Perfect sambhogakāya, glorious and mighty Hayagrīva,
drubpé rigdzin naga dzuna la
And Nāgārjuna, the accomplished vidyādhara—
solwa deb so düpung tar jé shok
To you I pray: exterminate the forces of Māra!

nangsi wanggyur pema gyalpo dang
Padma Gyalpo, who brought appearance and existence under control,
nyengyü kabab pema dongak ling
Dongak Lingpa,1 to whom the aural transmission was transmitted,
chödak kyechok gyüpar chepa la
And the lineage for supreme beings entrusted with this Dharma—
solwa deb so düpung tar jé shok
To you I pray: exterminate the forces of Māra!

yidam wangchen tachok rolpa dang
The yidam deity, mighty and supreme emanation Hayagrīva,
khandro chökyong norlha terdak sok
Ḍākinīs, dharmapālas, wealth deities, treasure-keepers and the rest,
pema sung gi kyilkhor rabjam la
All who belong to the infinite maṇḍalas of Lotus Speech—
solwa deb so düpung tar jé shok
To you I pray: exterminate the forces of Māra!

shyi yi rik sé lam gyi dröpa yi
By awakening the ground potential and traversing the path,
nangsi tamché döné dakpar shar
May appearance and existence arise in their original purity.2
také teng sum gongpa ngöngyur né
May we realize the intent of the three neighs of the horse,
drebu tachok rolpa ngöngyur shok
And actualise the fruition of the supreme Hayagrīva emanation.

By Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö. Siddhirastu!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2022.

Sources:
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "snyan brgyud rta mchog rol ba'i brgyud 'debs" in gsung 'bum/_'jam
dbyangs chos kyi blo gros/ (dbu med/). 8 vols. Gangtok: Dzongsar Khyentse Labrang,
1981–1985 (BDRC W21813). Vol. 4: 109–110
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "snyan brgyud rta mchog rol ba'i brgyud 'debs/" in 'Jam dbyangs
chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986. Vol.
3: 381
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "snyan brgyud rta mchog rol ba'i brgyud 'debs/" In blo gros
mtha' yas (ed.). rin chen gter mdzod chen mo/. New Delhi: Shechen Publications, 2007–2008.
Vol. 26: 491–492

Version: 1.0-20220107
↑ I.e., Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo (1820–1892).↑ Note that the Shechen Rinchen Terdzö edition erroneously
reads gdon nas in place of gdod nas.